The Pitch: The first trailer for Morbius, the newest effort by Sony Pictures to hold onto the Marvel characters to which it still owns the rights, originally premiered in January 2020, in anticipation of its planned July 2020 premiere.

That premiere didn’t happen for, y’know, reasons, but in the literal years since, new trailers for the film have continued to appear online and in theaters, with one of them buttoned by a reasonably funny joke: Its central character, in full monster face, growling “I… am… Venom!” at a thug, then abruptly shifting to a smile to say, “I’m just kidding! Dr. Michael Morbius, at your service.”

That moment didn’t just name-drop a previous Sony/Marvel collaboration, but showcased a clever reversal on expectations, not to mention star Jared Leto doling out some very welcome charisma. Aired repeatedly over the last several months, “Dr. Michael Morbius, at your service” was a promise that Morbius wouldn’t take itself too seriously — that it might even have a little fun.

Unfortunately, in the final film, when that moment arrives, it’s without the second half of the line. Whether it was cut for time or cut for tone, its absence is a microcosm of the elements which ensure that Morbius, at best, will be remembered as the latest effort on Sony’s part to make its nascent Sinister Six franchise happen. And, like “fetch,” it’s hard to see that happening.

Meet the Marvel Universe’s Version of a Vampire: In Morbius, the titular individual is a brilliant doctor with a mysterious blood disease that’s led to poor health and the need to use crutches his entire life; his search for a cure leads him to the vampire bats of Costa Rica, which he collects in the film’s opening sequence and brings back to his New York lab in the hope that their ability to metabolize blood can fix his own.

It’s hardly much of a spoiler to say that the good doctor is successful in his efforts, but as he discovers after administering the cure to himself, it has a lot of side effects: some good, like bat-inspired superpowers including echo location and enough wind sense to fake your way through flying. Some bad, like an all-consuming need to consume human blood.

Michael’s cure is of extreme interest to his childhood best friend Milo (Matt Smith), who suffers from a similar condition, and isn’t too bothered by the downsides that come with it. A more daring film would perhaps be more engaged with the ethical questions posed by the scenario, but Morbius is too focused on getting through its paint-by-numbers origin story plotting to take the time to consider that. Instead, the plot moves quickly through Morbius getting his powers, followed by him trying to cope with them while also dealing with Milo’s lust for power.

Jared Leto’s Most Grounded Performance in a Long Time: That feels like a strange thing to say about a movie where the Oscar-winning star plays a blood-guzzling super-vampire. Yet in comparison to his tWiStEd take on the Joker and whatever the hell you call what he was doing in House of Gucci, Dr. Michael Morbius feels like a nice chill guy you’d want to have a beer with.

Leto doesn’t phone in his performance and the chemistry between him and fellow doctor/requisite ladyfriend Martine (Adria Arjona) is solid. But while he seems remarkably centered in who Michael Morbius is as a character, the audience is left clueless beyond flashes of genius and wit. Initially, the character’s goal is to find a cure for his disease; once he does that, though, the film is so busy motoring through the awkward plot’s chain of events that the question of what he wants now isn’t clear.

Beyond taking down the bad guy, of course — and for the record, of all the film’s problems, Smith’s work is not one of them. The former Doctor and Crown star commits with relish to Milo’s circumstances, wearing his aforementioned snazzy suits (really, all of Milo’s ensembles in the film are pretty flawless). Has Smith ever given an actually bad performance? Nothing comes to mind, perhaps because it’s never happened.

Some Notes on Aesthetics: For this film, director Daniel Espinosa makes some choices that don’t necessarily make a lot of sense — as one small example, there’s an awful lot of hot pink and neon purple included in the opening and closing credits, which are not exactly the colors one associates with a project like this.

In addition, there’s the visual choice to surround Morbius, when he’s in Action Vampire mode, with what might be best described as “swirly wispy bits.” Do the swirly wispy bits represent his bat senses in action? The wind moving around him? It’s not that an explanation is essential, but it’d be nice to understand the reasoning behind it beyond “the swirly wispy bits look cool.”

That said, the make-up/CGI involved in giving Morbius his “game face” (to borrow the parlance of Buffy the Vampire Slayer) is pretty remarkable, a ghoulish bony grey design that feels relatively fresh in comparison to decades of past vampire tales, and shifts and adapts to the scenario in solid ways.

The Verdict: As savvy viewers have learned over the years, when you’re watching a comic book movie you shouldn’t leave the theater after the closing credits roll, because you’ll miss at least one or two fun Easter eggs. But in the case of Morbius, the post-credits scenes quite frankly feel like the only reason the movie was made in the first place, as Sony continues its quest for an MCU of its very own.

Morbius feels like Espinosa and writers Matt Sazama and Burk Sharpless were handed the assignment of “make a Morbius origins movie” and did the job by working off a pre-written checklist of elements they needed to include. Once they were done with the checklist, they had technically completed the assignment, except there was one task that wasn’t on the list: Make this movie, or at least its main character, feel relevant or even necessary.

This is where not just Morbius, but the whole “Sony’s Spider-Man Universe” concept is in danger of falling apart. What the early MCU films (Iron Man, Thor, Captain America: The First Avenger) knew was that in order for the concept of a team-up adventure like 2012’s The Avengers to be as exciting as it would eventually be, each individual character would have to be able to support a film on their own merits.

Morbius, unfortunately, failed to do this for its lead, though this humble review is not going to stop Sony from its determination to put Leto’s Morbius, Michael Keaton’s Vulture, and of course Tom Hardy’s Venom on a poster together — ideally fighting a Spider-Man, played by Tom Holland or who knows who else.

And hey, maybe that eventual film will work. Maybe Morbius is simply a misstep that occurs when you devote a whole film to a character who’s really the Hawkeye of the team. The history of film is packed with stories of success out of presumed failure, after all.

But after watching another lackluster attempt to reverse engineer a mega-franchise (one which Sony very clearly hopes can stand separately from the MCU down the line), it’s hard to get too excited about that potential future. Venom: Let There Be Carnage at least had the good manners to be extremely weird. Morbius is just… there. If this is the best use of Marvel’s IP that Sony is capable of, maybe Sony should reconsider its plans.
