Well, who knew?

It turns out Saul Goodman wasn't always the highly strung shyster lawyer we came to know and love/loathe in Breaking Bad. He used to be a lot worse. Or, at least, a hell of a lot more desperate.

In Better Call Saul, Breaking Bad creator Vince Gilligan and his co-writer, Peter Gould (he also worked on BB), have crafted an origin story for the ambulance-chasing strip-mall attorney, and it rivals the earlier show for surprises, twists and an intoxicating blend of comedy and tragedy.

It opens with a man only dimly recognisable as Saul (Bob Odenkirk) making slushies and sweeping the floor in a Cinnabon pastry shop in a mega-mall. The scene is black and white and, apart from a brief moment when he thinks he's been recognised, so is Saul's life.

Alone in his apartment, he mixes a strong drink and plonks himself in front of the idiot box, barely registering what's on. Eventually, he gets up and rummages around for a hidden box, retrieves a video cassette and pops it in the machine (where, you might wonder, did he even find one of those).

It's a showreel of his raucous TV ads and though we don't see them, we do see the flickering of colour reflected in his lenses as he watches.

Ah, those were the days.

Flashback to 2001 and Saul is a hard-scrabble lawyer called Jimmy McGill. It's his real name, apparently, and although he shares it with one of the partners of a wealthy law firm, it's not working out for him. He's flat broke, without any clients (or electricity or gas), and truly desperate.

When a couple of skateboarding hustlers try to fleece him by staging an accident (they fail, because he has nothing to fleece), Jimmy sees an opportunity. He enlists them for a scheme to fleece a bigger fish - and ends up by knocking on a door that's answered by Tuco (Raymond Cruz), the psycho meth dealer from Breaking Bad's second season. And so the cycle of chance and bad choices begins.

There are moments in this premiere episode when the tone of Better Call Saul seems a little uncertain, and in its first 20 minutes or so, Gilligan toys mercilessly with the audience's sense of anticipation, making us wait for what seems an eternity for our first glimpse of the man who would be Saul. Typically, it comes in a bathroom, where he's rehearsing his address to the jury.

When this shadow play moves to the courtroom, Jimmy/Saul's theatrics are in stark contrast to the silence all around him. It's unsettling, and it feels almost misjudged, but the pay-off is there in the reveal of the crime our "hero" is defending: three teens have had sex with the head of a corpse, an offence he has tried to brush off as a case of youthful hijinks, and a minor misdemeanour.

The Saul of Breaking Bad always teetered on the edge of farce, but despite the broad moments, this is a reading far more anchored in pathos than comedy. Jimmy is, like the Walter White we first met, a man with nothing much to lose and no reason he can see not to gamble it all on a lucky - if illegal - break.

By the end of the episode, it had all started to feel kind of familiar, in the best possible way. It was a flying start, and if Gilligan and Gould can keep it up, Saul will indeed be worth calling up every Monday night.
